Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
DOI 10.1007/s00221-008-1553-z
REVIEW
Cross-modal plasticity for the spatial processing of sounds
in visually deprived subjects
Olivier Collignon · Patrice Voss · Maryse Lassonde ·
Franco Lepore
Received: 18 June 2008 / Accepted: 15 August 2008 / Published online: 2 September 2008
© Springer-Verlag 2008
Abstract Until only a few decades ago, researchers still cuss that such cross-modal recruitment may, to some
considered sensory cortices to be Wxed or “hardwired,” with extent, follow organizational principles similar to the func-
speciWc cortical regions solely dedicated to the processing tional topography of the region observed in the sighted.
of selective sensory inputs. But recent evidences have Even if such recruitment is especially present in individuals
shown that the brain can rewire itself, showing an impres- having lost their sight in early infancy, occipital regions
sive range of cross-modal plasticity. Visual deprivation is also show impressive plastic properties when vision is lost
one of the rare human models that allow us to explore the at a later age. This observation will be related to recent
role of experience-dependent plasticity of a sensory cortex results demonstrating that occipital regions play a more
deprived of its natural inputs. The objective of this paper is important role than previously expected in the spatial pro-
to describe recent results regarding the spatial processing of cessing of sounds, even in sighted subjects. Putative physi-
sounds in blind subjects. These studies suggest that blind ological mechanisms underlying such cross-modal
individuals may demonstrate exceptional abilities in audi- recruitment will then be discussed. All these results have
tory spatial processing and that such enhanced perfor- important implications for understanding the role of visual
mances may be intrinsically linked to the recruitment of experience in shaping the development of occipital regions
occipital areas deprived of their normal visual inputs. Such and may guide the implementation of rehabilitative meth-
results highlight the brain’s remarkable ability to rewire its ods such as sensory substitution or neural implants.
components to compensate for the challenging neurological
condition that is visual deprivation. Moreover, we shall dis- Keywords Blindness · Plasticity · Cross-modal ·
Auditory · Spatial
O. Collignon · P. Voss · M. Lassonde · F. Lepore
Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et
Behavioral compensation for the spatial processing
Cognition (CERNEC), Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Canada of sounds
e-mail: olivier.collignon@uclouvain.be
Evolution has provided several sensory modalities to humans
O. Collignon
in order to capture distinct forms of energies, opening diVer-
Neural Rehabilitation Engineering Laboratory,
Centre for Research in Neurosciences (CRN), ent windows through which we can experience the world
Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium around us. The presence of these diVerent sensory systems
paves the way for considerable behavioral Xexibility by
M. Lassonde · F. Lepore
allowing a system to supplement another following sensory
Centre de Recherche CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Canada
deprivation (Stein and Meredith 1993). In this context, the
F. Lepore (&) notion that vision loss is partly oVset by improved perfor-
Département de Psychologie, CERNEC,
mance in the remaining modalities has become very popular
Université de Montréal, 90 Vincent d’Indy,
and is often used to explain the development of some special
CP 6128, succ. Centre-Ville, Montreal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada
e-mail: franco.lepore@umontreal.ca abilities in blind people (Collignon etal. 2006).
123
344 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
The spatial processing of sounds has received consider- localization errors in blind subjects who previously per-
able attention from researchers investigating putative sen- formed well in the monaural task. This Wnding conWrms the
sory compensation resulting from blindness. This is view that enhanced localization performance observed in
certainly due to the fundamental role that this ability plays some blind subjects may be related to a reWned use of subtle
for blind people in navigating in their environment, which auditory cues, such as the spectral content of sounds.
is a prerequisite to independent daily-life activities. This The studies described above examined spatial hearing in
may also be related to the essential and dominant role that near space, a region where auditory representations can be
vision normally plays in the analysis of space in sighted calibrated through sensory-motor feedback in blind subjects,
subjects, which may lead to a greater susceptibility of reor- such as touching the source of the sound or through the use
ganization for non-visual space processing in the case of of a cane, for example. The question remained, however,
visual deprivation. Indeed, it has long been debated whether normal or supra-normal abilities would also be
whether blind individuals have perceptual advantages or observed for sounds originating in far space, where no such
disadvantages in processing auditory spatial information. calibration is possible. In a recent experiment using distal
The fundamental question has been whether the lack of (3–4m) sound sources, we showed that blind individuals
vision disrupts the proper development of auditory spatial properly map auditory space beyond their peri-personal
skills or if, on the contrary, blindness results in above-nor- environment but also demonstrate supra-normal perfor-
mal performance in the preserved modalities. It was Wrst mance when subtle acoustic cues for target location and dis-
thought that visual deprivation might be detrimental to the tance discrimination are needed to carry out the task (Voss
development of spatial abilities in the remaining modalities etal. 2004). Moreover, we examined whether late-onset
since vision may be required to calibrate the other sensory blind subjects can manifest sensory compensation, since
systems (Axelrod 1959; Locke 1954; Rock and Halper only a few studies have investigated this point. We thus car-
1969; Warren and Cleaves 1971). Even if a few studies ried out the task in late blind subjects and showed that this
gave some support to this notion (Lewald 2002a; Zwiers group could also develop above-normal spatial abilities
etal. 2001), a number of recent results, including the ones (Voss etal. 2004). The latter result of enhanced auditory
from our group, clearly demonstrate that vision is not spatial abilities in subjects with late onset blindness was
essential for the calibration of auditory localization cues conWrmed in another recent study (Fieger etal. 2006). It is
and that, under some circumstances, blind people show worth noting that in both cases (Voss etal. 2004; Fieger
supra-normal abilities in auditory tasks. etal. 2006) the superiority of late blind subjects was only
In a seminal study, we investigated the auditory spatial present when sounds were presented in peripheral space
localization abilities of early blind individuals under binaural straddling the inter-aural plane. These results precisely
and monaural listening conditions (Lessard etal. 1998). We reproduce what was observed with early blind subjects,
Wrst demonstrated that blind subjects can localize binaurally whose supra-normal performances were mainly observed in
presented sounds as well as sighted individuals, suggesting the periphery, where more subtle auditory cues (i.e., spec-
that vision is not necessary for the construction of a three- tral) have to be exploited to eYciently resolve the task
dimensional map of space (see Fig.1a, b). Moreover, it was (Roder etal. 1999; Voss etal. 2004; Fieger etal. 2006;
found that under monaural localization, performances of Simon etal. 2002). Interestingly, when behavioral compen-
blind subjects can surpass those of sighted participants. In sations are observed for the processing of visuo-spatial stim-
fact, in all sighted subjects and in half of the blind ones, the uli in deaf subjects, they also mainly concern inputs
obstruction of one ear induced a strong localization bias originating in the peripheral visual-Weld (Neville and Law-
towards the unobstructed ear (see Fig.1c). However, half of son 1987; Bavelier etal. 2000). These compensations
the blind subjects were able to correctly localize sounds ipsi- observed speciWcally for peripheral stimuli may be related to
lateral to the obstructed ear in almost 100% of the trials the fact that they occur preferentially in conditions where
(Fig.1d). This Wnding strongly suggests that some blind indi- the task is diYcult. If the processing at play is already
viduals can use subtle spatial cues more eYciently than extremely precise in sighted subjects, as during binaural
sighted controls, particularly the spectral content of the processing of central stimuli, the condition generally leads
sound, which is one of the principal remaining cues for local- to ceiling eVects in both groups, and thus renders it diYcult
izing a source under a monaural listening condition (Van to observe diVerences between groups (Lessard etal. 1998;
Wanrooij and Van Opstal 2004). In order to further test this Voss etal. 2008; Roder etal. 1999). However, if the task
hypothesis, we manipulated the spectral content of stimuli requiring the processing of a central source is suYciently
either by frequency Wltering or by Wlling the cavities of the diYcult, one may also observe diVerences between the two
open ear pinna with acoustical paste and examined how per- groups. This hypothesis is partially supported by studies
formance under monaural testing was aVected (Doucet etal. demonstrating superior spatial hearing abilities in blind sub-
2004). These manipulations induced a signiWcant increase in jects in complex tasks not relying on eccentricity, such as
123
Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358 345
Fig.1 Sound localization performances in the study of Lessard etal. condition only (left ear-obstructed) as the other condition (right ear-ob-
(1998). a Sighted control subjects in the binaural condition of listening; structed) yielded identical results. The Wgure illustrates that in binaural
b one representative early blind subject in the binaural condition of lis- condition of listening, early blind subjects localize sounds as well as
tening; c sighted control subjects in the monaural condition of listen- sighted subjects. However, in monaural conditions, whereas all sighted
ing; d one totally blind subject who correctly localized the sound with subjects localized sounds presented on the side of the obstructed ear to
no directional bias. The dashed lines indicate the actual sound sources, the opposite side, half of the blind group did not show such a bias and
whereas the dots refer to the perceived target locations with their thus showing supra-normal performance for spatial hearing. Adapted
respective standard deviations. Results are shown for one monaural with permission from Lessard etal. (1998)
inter-aural time diVerence discrimination (Yabe and Kaga sighted ones in localizing sounds in the vertical plane (ele-
2005) or the use of echo-location cues (Dufour etal. 2005; vation). These Wndings led to the conclusion that visual
Rice etal. 1965; Rice and Feinstein 1965; Strelow and Bra- feedback might be necessary to calibrate the vertical audi-
byn 1982). Interestingly, in one of these echo-location stud- tory space in front of the subject. Such results may be
ies, researchers demonstrated improved processing of echo related to the work of Knudsen (1988) who demonstrated
information even in myopic (near-sighted) subjects (Despres that the optic tectum of the barn owls raised without sight,
etal. 2005; Dufour and Gerard 2000), suggesting that an but with normal hearing, develop auditory space maps with
increase in spatial acuity of the intact auditory system can degraded precision and with aspects of topography that are
not only occur when the visual system undergoes a total abnormal (Knudsen 1988). These data put into question
deprivation but also in the case of only partial deWcits. previous report of the representation of space and auditory
All these studies point to the fact that visually deprived hyperacuity in the blind. Since our study reporting supra-
listeners are fully able to use auditory cues for spatial hear- normal abilities have used constant sound intensity regard-
ing and that vision is not a mandatory prerequisite for the less of the location of the sound source (Lessard etal.
calibration of space. It seems likely that this calibration in 1998), Zwiers etal. (2001) argued that monaural intensity
blind subjects comes from experiencing changes in sound- judgement may explain the better performance of blind
localization cues arising from self-motion, such as turning individuals. Lewald (2002b) proposes an alternative inter-
of the head, the body, or walking in the environment toward pretation by suggesting that the compensatory abilities that
the sound sources (Ashmead etal. 1989, 1998). However, could be observed in some conditions in blind subjects may
the assumption that vision is not necessary for the adequate be attributable to the enhanced processing of proprioceptive
development of auditory spatial representation has also information (i.e., body position) rather than superior audi-
been challenged. Zwiers and collaborators (2001) and tory capabilities per se. Evidently, further research is neces-
Lewald (2002a, b) found that blind subjects were inferior to sary to disentangle which auditory localization cues are
123
346 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
better processed by the blind while others are less well cali- memory (Amedi etal. 2003; Roder etal. 2001; Roder and
brated in the absence of vision during development. Rosler 2003) and language-related (Burton etal. 2002b;
Roder etal. 2000) processing in early blind subjects.
Of great relevance for the arguments advanced in the
Cross-modal processing of spatial sounds present paper, Kujala etal. were among the Wrst to show
in the occipital cortex that event-related potentials (ERPs) triggered by a change
in the locus of origin of a repetitive sound was more poste-
The visual system has served as a model for studies dealing riorly distributed on the scalp in early blind subjects as
with neuronal development and plasticity for a long time. compared to sighted controls (Kujala etal. 1992). This sug-
Since the seminal studies of Wiesel and Hubel on the devel- gested that the blind might use occipital brain areas to a
opment of ocular dominance, we know that alterations in larger extent than sighted individuals in sound localization.
visual experience can inXuence the normal development of In our laboratory, we also recorded auditory ERPs in blind
the visual cortex (Wiesel and Hubel 1965, 1974). In fact, participants during a free-Weld sound localization paradigm
extensive neuroplastic changes have been demonstrated in (Leclerc etal. 2000). The participants were the same con-
intact sensory systems following diVerent training regimens genitally blind subjects who had previously shown a supra-
(Elbert etal. 2002; Pascual-Leone and Torres 1993; Sterr normal performance in the sound localization task of Les-
etal. 1998). It was further postulated that the functioning of sard etal. (1998). The results revealed that the N1 and the
visual structures would be inXuenced in a dramatic fashion P3 components peaked at their usual positions in both
following visual deprivation, and increasing evidence groups but were also found to be robust over occipital
points to extensive cross-modal reorganizations in the regions in blind individuals only. The presence of a steeper
deprived system. N1 deXection over the occipital pole of blind persons
Rauschecker and collaborators were among the Wrst to (Fig.2) suggests that their occipital cortex may be involved
clearly establish that early visual deprivation in cats leads to in early stages of auditory processing (at around 100ms
cross-modal compensation at both the behavioral and neuro- after sound presentation). To further explore the relevance
physiological levels (Rauschecker 1995). As was the case for of the N1 as a marker of cross-modal compensation, Lecl-
the human subjects described above, they found that visually erc etal. (2005) analyzed these data for EEG coherence in a
deprived animals showed superior sound localization abili- wide range of frequency bands to determine whether blind
ties (Rauschecker and Kniepert 1994; see also King and Par- individuals would show enhanced coherence reXecting
sons 1999). They also studied the physiological mechanisms increased connectivity between the central auditory and
underlying this superior performance. They recorded neurons posterior cortical regions. It was found that oscillations in
of the anterior ectosylvian area, which is normally a multi- the theta, alpha, and beta frequency bands in fronto-central
modal area, and found not only that the sub-area responsive and occipital electrodes were linked during the task to a
to auditory stimuli was signiWcantly expanded in the larger extent in early blind subjects compared to sighted
deprived animals (Rauschecker and Korte 1993) but also that controls. This Wnding can be seen as an indicator of
the neurons were more sharply tuned to auditory spatial loca- enhanced connectivity between auditory and visual brain
tion (Korte and Rauschecker 1993). Similarly, in humans, a regions in the former group (Leclerc etal. 2005). Another
number of laboratories have attempted to examine whether previous ERP study also demonstrated a posterior distribu-
occipital areas deprived of their normal input could adapt to tion of the N1 during the spatial processing of laterally pre-
process inputs from the remaining senses. In a pioneering sented sounds in early blind subjects (Roder etal. 1999),
study using positron emission tomography (PET), Veraart supporting the hypothesis that early aspects of auditory pro-
and collaborators demonstrated abnormally elevated meta- cessing are involved in the cross-modal recruitment of
bolic activity in occipital areas of early blind individuals at occipital regions in the blind.
rest, which was at about the same level as in sighted subjects As a complement to these electrophysiological tech-
involved in a constraining visual task (Veraart etal. 1990; niques and their powerful temporal resolution, functional
Wanet-Defalque etal. 1988). A further study showed that neuroimaging tools, like PET or functional magnetic reso-
this elevated metabolic activity was not due to gliosis, but nance imaging (fMRI), provide much better spatial preci-
indeed related to neural activity (De Volder etal. 1997). sion regarding the localization of cortical regions involved
Since these preliminary works, a number of neuroimaging in cross-modal processing in the blind. Weeks and collabo-
studies using various paradigms have now demonstrated rators (Weeks etal. 2000) used PET and reported that blind
task-dependent activations of the occipital cortex (OC) dur- but not sighted subjects strongly activated association areas
ing tactile (Buchel 1998; Burton etal. 2002a; Pietrini etal. in the right dorsal occipital cortex. This region was also
2004; Sadato etal. 1996), auditory (Kujala etal. 1995; highly activated in early blind subjects using a sensory sub-
Leclerc etal. 2000; Roder etal. 1999; Weeks etal. 2000), stitution prosthesis translating visual information into
123
Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358 347
Fig.2 a Grand average ERPs to
auditory stimuli recorded over
Oz site in four blind subjects
with supra-normal auditory
localization abilities and in 12
sighted controls subjects. b
Scalp distribution of the N1 with
topographical maps of the mean
voltage amplitudes ((cid:1)V) in the
sighted (top) and blind (bottom)
groups. The rightmost bar pre-
sents negative activation in grad-
uated fashion. The Wgure
illustrates that the early auditory
component N1 is prominent in
blind subjects but almost absent
in sighted ones. Adapted with
permissions from Leclerc etal.
(2000)
sounds, in a task that mainly targeted auditory spatial pro- region is critical for a particular behavior. This method has
cessing (Arno etal. 2001a). It is worth noting that this thus been used to prove the necessity of the occipital cortex
region corresponds to regions that have previously been of the blind for Braille reading (Cohen etal. 1997; Kupers
shown to be involved in visuo-spatial processing in sighted etal. 2007) and verbal (Amedi etal. 2004) processing. We
subjects (Haxby etal. 1991, 1994). The similarity in the also demonstrated that TMS interfered with the use of a
foci of activation between visuo-spatial processing in the prosthesis substituting vision by audition (PSVA) and with
sighted and auditory spatial processing in the blind suggests the localization of sounds in blind subjects when applied
that these areas may retain their functional and neuronal over the right dorsal extrastriate cortex (Collignon etal.
coding ability, which would enable them to process input 2007), a region that was shown in PET to be highly acti-
from a diVerent sensory modality. Reinforcing this notion, vated by these tasks in the blind (Arno etal. 2001a; Weeks
some of us recently observed that auditory motion process- etal. 2000). By contrast, TMS targeting the same cortical
ing in congenitally blind individuals activated the brain net- area had no eVect on any auditory performance in sighted
work for auditory and visual motion processing classically subjects and did not interfere with pitch and intensity dis-
observed in sighted subjects (Poirier etal. 2006b). Accord- criminations in the blind (see Fig.3). We thus concluded
ingly, brain areas previously considered to be involved in that early visual deprivation leads to functional cerebral
visual motion processing were speciWcally recruited in reorganization such that the right dorsal stream is recruited
blind people by motion stimuli presented through the audi- for the spatial processing of sounds, a result which is in
tory modality. In the same vein, a recent fMRI study clear agreement with previous neuroimaging studies on
showed that region MT+/V5, that normally processes non-visual space processing in this population (Arno etal.
visual motion in the sighted, selectively responded to both 2001a; Poirier etal. 2006b; Saenz etal. 2008; Vanlierde
moving sounds and moving visual stimuli in two individu- etal. 2003). Here again, these results suggest that spatial
als who had been blind since early childhood and whose hearing in the blind maps onto specialized sub-regions of
vision had been partially recovered in adulthood (Saenz the occipital cortex known to be involved in the spatial pro-
etal. 2008). cessing of visual input in sighted people. Interestingly, a
It is, on the other hand, possible that these results may recent study reported activation of a sub-region of the lat-
simply reXect an association between stimulus presentation eral-occipital complex (LOtv) normally responsive to
and cortical activation, without actually proving that occip- visual and tactile object-related processing when blind sub-
ital areas of the blind are functionally involved in non- jects extracted shape information from visual-to-auditory
visual processing. These co-activations may simply result sensory substitution soundscapes (Amedi etal. 2007; see
from non-functionally related connections between these also Pietrini etal. 2004 for ventral activations in tactile
cortices. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which shape recognition in the blind). In a similar manner, neuro-
induces a focal and transient disruption of the proper func- imaging studies showed that mental imagery of object
tioning of a targeted area, is therefore a useful approach to shape recruited more ventral occipital areas (De Volder
determine whether and to what extent a speciWc brain etal. 2001), whereas mental imagery of object position
123
348 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
Fig.3 InXuence of TMS over the occipital cortex on performance in Wgure displays the average percentage of correct pattern recognition
three auditory discrimination tasks and in a pattern recognition task us- (d) and the mean exploration time (e) taken to recognize patterns. The
ing PSVA. The Wrst part of the Wgure denotes the average error rate in data indicate a signiWcant decrease of recognition score and a signiW-
blind and sighted subjects after sham and real TMS targeting the dorsal cant increase of exploration time after real compared to sham TMS in
occipital stream during auditory tasks involving discrimination of the blind group only. Panel f displays the projection of the site of TMS
intensity (a), pitch (b) and spatial location (c). The data show a signiW- application on a 3-D reconstruction of a blind subject’s brain. This area
cant increase of the error rate after real rTMS only in the blind group corresponds to the right dorsal extrastriate occipital cortex (BA 18).
and selectively for the sound location task. The second part of the Adapted with permissions from Collignon etal. (2007)
recruited more dorsal occipital regions (Vanlierde etal. (one ear plugged), the degree of activation of several foci
2003) in the blind. It thus appears that a functional dissocia- in the striate and extrastriate cortex correlated with sound
tion between a ventral “What” stream for the processing of localization accuracy (Gougoux etal. 2005) (see Fig.4b).
object shape and a dorsal “Where” stream for the process- Among these foci, we found that a region of the right dor-
ing of space also exists for auditory stimuli treated in the sal extrastriate cortex highly correlated with performance,
occipital cortex of blind subjects. thus conWrming the implication of this region in spatial
The demonstration that transient perturbation of occip- hearing in early blind subjects (Collignon etal. 2007;
ital area with TMS selectively disrupted auditory spatial Weeks etal. 2000). Moreover, we found a correlation
processing in the blind compared to sighted subjects illus- between performance and the right lingual gyrus, a region
trates that this “visual” area is functionally involved in the known to form part of the ventral visual pathway, which is
neural network that underlies auditory ability (Collignon important for identifying visual objects. If this region is
etal. 2007). This functional relevance of occipital recruit- important for the processing of visual object features,
ment thus explains how visual cortex activation may con- such as contour or texture (Kastner etal. 2000; Mendola
tribute to superior hearing abilities observed in blind etal. 1999), it is possible that the same area is used in the
people. We therefore examined whether occipital activity blind to process analogous features for auditory stimuli
levels would predict diVerences in behavioral perfor- such as spectral contour, as elicited by the monaural local-
mances. We used a speaker array that permitted pseudo- ization task. This result not only conWrms an enhanced
free-Weld presentations of sounds during PET-scanning recruitment of occipital region in auditory spatial process-
(Gougoux etal. 2005; Voss etal. 2006, 2008) (see ing in blind subjects but also suggests that such restructur-
Fig.4a). In a Wrst study conducted in early blind individu- ing of the auditory circuit may underlie their superior
als, we observed that during monaural sound localization abilities.
123
Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358 349
Although most researchers now agree that early blind tion in striate and extrastriate cortices of the left hemi-
individuals beneWt from plastic changes involving the sphere). Overall, the current results indicate that the late
occipital cortex, the debate is still open as to whether or not blind do show altered functioning of their deaVerented
the same is true for late blind ones.1 Some studies have visual cortices. However, the age of onset appears to play
shown that plastic changes can occur in the latter (Buchel an important role regarding the extent of plasticity and in
etal. 1998; Kujala etal. 1997), whereas others have sug- determining the speciWc regions recruited by auditory tasks.
gested the existence of a critical period beyond which little Similarly, the ERP paradigm used by Roder and collabora-
or no cerebral reorganization is possible (Cohen etal. 1999; tors (1999)to demonstrate a posterior distribution of the N1
Sadato etal. 2002). We thus designed two PET studies component in the early blind was recently used to test late
using the same material described above (see Fig.4a) to blind subjects (Fieger etal. 2006). It was found that the lat-
assess the eVects of the age of onset of blindness on audi- ter, like the former, demonstrate an enhanced capability for
tory localization. In two separate studies (Voss etal. 2006, focusing auditory attention in the periphery. However,
2008), we observed altered functioning of the deprived these supra-normal abilities seem to depend on diVerent
visual cortices of late blind subjects. In a Wrst study using a mechanisms, since the early blind demonstrate a more
sound localization task, we observed occipital activations in sharply tuned early attentional Wltering, manifested in the
late blind subjects but not in sighted ones, without any N1 ERP component, whereas the late blind show reorgani-
behavioral advantage of late blind participants over sighted zation in the later stages of target discrimination, indexed
ones during both monaural and binaural conditions (Voss by the P3 (Fieger etal. 2006). Similarly, Munte and collab-
etal. 2006) (see Fig. 5). A second experiment (Voss etal. orators (2001)carried out the same ERP paradigm and
2008) was designed to use a less demanding spatial audi- found that experienced professional conductors displayed a
tory task while sharing similarities with the one used in our sharper slope of the N1 gradient compared to pianists and
previous behavioral study (Voss etal. 2004). The similari- non-musicians when spatially processing sounds in the
ties with the tasks, however, did not produce similar results. periphery. However, in contrast to the results of early blind
One subgroup of early blind subjects excelled in the mon- subjects (Roder etal. 1999), the scalp distribution of the N1
aural task, whereas the late blinds (along with a second for conductors did not diVer from that of other musicians.
group of early blind subjects) were no diVerent than sighted This distributional similarity of the two groups may be
individuals. While behavioral enhancements in the late compared to the Wnding that the N1 distributions of sighted
blinds were not observed within the context of the current and late blind adults did not diVer in the study of Fieger
experiment, clear and novel plastic changes were on the etal. (2006). Taken together, all these results reinforce the
other hand observed. Ventral visual areas of the occipito- hypothesis that improved sound localization is mediated by
temporal cortices were recruited during the monaural task. diVerent reorganization mechanisms in developing and
This contrasts with both what was observed in sighted indi- adult brains. More generally, they suggest that the human
viduals (no activation in visual areas) and in early blind brain retains a high level of plasticity into adulthood,
participants with superior performance (widespread activa- though not necessarily identical to that of the young brain,
making it possible for adaptive changes which can possibly
partially compensate for the visual handicap throughout the
1 In all the cited papers, the upper limit for total blindness acquisition lifetime. However, the exact mechanisms underlying these
in the early blind group vary between 2 and 10years and the lower lim- diVerential takeovers with respect to the age of onset of
it for total blindness acquisition for the late blind group vary from 9 to
blindness remain unclear.
16years. Although some authors have suggested the existence of a pre-
cise critical period (i.e., 14years) beyond which little or no behavioral Support for the existence of behavioral and cerebral
compensation and no crossmodal recruitment of primary visual cortex reorganization and behavioral compensation in the adult
is possible (Cohen etal. 1999; Sadato etal. 2002), we think that the
resulting from visual deprivation can also be seen in studies
determination of an exact age cut-oV between “early” and “late” blind
subject is a diYcult exercise since it is inXuenced by the history of deW- with sighted subjects blindfolded for short periods of time.
cit acquisition. Indeed, it is quite rare that blind subjects suVer from For example Boroojerdi and collaborators (2000) elegantly
sudden and total blindness. Usually, blind subjects experience progres- showed using TMS and fMRI that short-term visual depri-
sive visual impairment prior to the onset of complete blindness. We
vation can induce substantial changes in the visual cortex’s
thus think that functional criteria should also be added when separating
excitability (see also Pitskel etal. 2007). These results are
early and late blind subjects. Indeed, it is fundamental that early blind
subjects, if not totally blind at birth, never had functional vision during compatible with the report of a signiWcant increase in
the Wrst years of life which would have led to the normal development occipital responses to sounds in sighted subjects blind-
of the visual system. At the contrary, late blind subjects only represent
folded for 5days (Pascual-Leone etal. 2005). Other studies
a good model for the observation of plasticity in adult if they had an
intact visual system before the apparition of visual deWcits. For exam- have also shown enhanced perceptual acuity in sighted sub-
ple, in our studies, all late blind subjects had been able to read print, jects after a short period of visual deprivation (Facchini and
travel by themselves, etc., to be included in our sample. Aglioti 2003; KauVman etal. 2002). For example, simply
123
350 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
Fig.4 a Stimulus array used to
present spatial sounds into the
PET-scan, shown outside the
scanner (left) and inside the
scanner (right). b Data of the
correlational analysis between
performance (mean absolute er-
ror) in pointing task to monau-
rally presented sounds and CBF
in a group of blind subjects. The
two columns of brain images
(left image series, sagittal sec-
tions; right image series, coronal
sections) illustrate regions in the
ventral extrastriate (a), in the
dorsal extrastriate (b) and striate
(c) cortices that correlate with
monaural sound location perfor-
mance in early blind subjects.
The red arrows in the coronal
slices indicate the focus selected
for the respective sagittal slices.
The scattergram shows the indi-
vidual values extracted from
each of these regions; closed cir-
cles indicate blind subjects; open
circles indicate sighted controls.
X and Y coordinates refer to stan-
dardized stereotaxic space.
Adapted with permissions from
Gougoux etal. (2005)
Fig.5 In the central portion of
the Wgure are presented the
behavioral results in a binaural
localization task. The dashed
lines indicate ideal performance
and the solid lines represent the
real localization performance.
To the left and right of the graph
are shown coronal and sagittal
slices, respectively, of activated
cortices in the binaural localiza-
tion task. Despite identical
behavioral performance, signiW-
cant activation is observed in the
visual cortex of the late-onset
blind group (Panel b) but not in
the sighted group (panel a)
123
Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358 351
blindfolding participants for 90min resulted in a reversible 1993, 1996; Huttenlocher 1966; Huttenlocher and de Court
improvement in accuracy during sound localization 1987; Huttenlocher and Dabholkar 1997; Rakic etal.
(Lewald 2007), similar, though smaller in magnitude, to the 1986). It was postulated that early synaptic contacts are
previously observed eVect in blind subjects (Lewald largely random and it is the elimination of weaker, unused
2002b). These Wndings indicate that short-term visual or redundant synapses that mediates the speciWcation of
deprivation may reveal highly dynamic plastic interactions functional and modular neuronal networks (Changeux etal.
between visual and auditory systems. It thus follows that 1973; Changeux and Danchin 1976). The human occipital
visual deprivation at a later age may inXuence existing neu- cortex undergoes such changes in synaptic density during
ronal circuits involved in processing auditory information its normal development (Huttenlocher and de Courten
in visual areas of normal subjects. In fact, a number of stud- 1987). After a peak of development ending approximately
ies, both in animals and humans, have demonstrated the at the age of 8months, about 40% of the synapses of the
involvement of occipital cortex in the processing of spatial visual cortex are gradually removed to achieve a stable syn-
sounds. In adult cats, Morrell (1972) found that up to 41% aptic density at approximately the age of 11years (Huttenl-
of recorded neurons in extrastriate occipital areas could be ocher and de Court 1987). Experiments with cats have
modulated by both visual and auditory stimuli and that the shown that during the synaptic pruning phase, projections
receptive Welds for both responses typically overlapped in from the auditory cortex towards the occipital cortex are
space (Morrell 1972; see also Fishman and Michael 1973 eliminated either through cell death or retraction of exuber-
for comparable results). Recent studies in humans have also ant collaterals (Dehay etal. 1988; Innocenti and Clarke
brought forth evidence of an occipital activation (Allman 1984; Innocenti etal. 1988; Kennedy etal. 1989), probably
and Meredith 2007; Giard and Peronnet 1999; Molholm through Hebbian competition (synapses that participate in
etal. 2002; Poirier etal. 2005; Zimmer etal. 2004) or driving a postsynaptic cell strengthen, while synapses that
involvement (Lewald etal. 2004; Collignon etal. 2008) in fail to drive a postsynaptic cell weaken; Hebb 1949). How-
auditory processing. Along these lines, recent anatomical ever, in kittens deprived of vision at birth, these extrinsic
studies have provided evidence for direct projections from connections to the occipital cortex seem to remain (Berman
the auditory cortex to the visual cortex in normal adult 1991; Yaka etal. 1999).
monkeys (Falchier etal. 2002; Rockland and Ojima 2003). Even if auditory inputs to occipital regions are main-
These data suggest that sound localization cues may be pro- tained in visually deprived subjects, is it possible that this
cessed in the occipital cortex of sighted subjects, putatively area normally dedicated to visual inputs reverts to process-
for multisensory purposes, such as the remapping of space ing auditory stimuli in a functional way? Experiments on
across changes in posture to keep the external auditory and “rewired” animals may help answer the question. By mak-
visual maps spatially aligned (Collignon etal. 2008). It is ing a series of brainstem lesions, it is possible to surgically
thus plausible that the processing of sounds in occipital cor- re-route visual input toward primary somatosensory or
tex of sighted subjects increases in the absence of the domi- auditory areas (Frost and Metin 1985; Roe etal. 1992,
nant visual inputs, even after a short period of light 1990; Sur etal. 1988). Such experiments not only demon-
deprivation. This mechanism of reinforcing pre-existing strated that these rewired regions share some structural and
auditory aVerents to occipital regions may also underlie at functional similarities with cells recorded in the visual cor-
least in part the cross-modal plasticity in late blindness. As tex of normally raised animals, but they also mediate some
will be discussed below, this mechanism probably diVers visually-guided behavior (Frost etal. 2000; von Melchner
from the one at play in early blind subjects because of the etal. 2000). These data therefore suggest that primary corti-
absence of developmental and competitive visual inputs in cal areas can change their functional speciWcity depending
the latter population. on which inputs they receive. It is thus possible that in the
absence of competitive visual inputs during the synaptic
stabilization phase, a signiWcant number of auditory con-
Putative mechanisms and anatomical substrates nections to the occipital cortex persist due to their activity,
underlying cross-modal plasticity which could explain the massive and functional interven-
tion of this region for the processing of sounds in blind sub-
While studies focusing on visual deprivation in animals and jects.
humans have undoubtedly demonstrated cross-modal It is worth noting that besides changes in cortico-cortical
recruitment of occipital regions, the mechanisms mediating connections from auditory to visual cortex, reorganization
such a reorganization are still elusive. We know from of subcortical pathways has also been proposed to drive
neuro-developmental studies in humans and primates that auditory information in the visual cortex of the blind.
after a Wrst period of exuberant proliferation of synapses, Indeed, neuronal tracing studies in blind animals have
their numbers are gradually reduced (Bourgeois and Rakic revealed that the inferior colliculus (an auditory relay) may
123
352 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
project to thalamic structures normally occupied by the inputs in visual cortex when comparing blind to sighted
visual system (i.e., the lateral geniculate nucleus) (Chabot subjects might be due to a masking eVect of the dominant
etal. 2008; Doron and Wollberg 1994; Izraeli etal. 2002; visual modality in this region. The cross-modal plasticity in
Piche etal. 2004, 2007). It is possible that a combination of the case of late blindness may in fact rely on the strengthen-
both cortical and subcortical connectivity changes explain ing of normally present subtle auditory connections within
how the visually deprived occipital cortex receives auditory the occipital visual areas following the loss of vision. This
inputs in cases of early blindness (Karlen etal. 2006). idea receives further support from studies using short-term
While the maintenance of normally transient intermodal visual deprivation where the speed at which changes in
connections may underlie, at least in part, the plastic occipital activity occur is not commensurate with the crea-
changes observed with congenital loss of sight, this could tion of new connections (Pascual-Leone and Hamilton
not account for the cerebral reorganization in the case of 2001; Pascual-Leone etal. 2005). In summary, these data
late blindness since visual deprivation arises in a brain suggest that some of the transient auditory connections
already wired for visual processing. Consequently, diVer- might not be pruned but rather silenced because of their rel-
ences in the mechanisms mediating cross-modal plasticity atively low signal strength in a context of visual domi-
in early and late blind subjects must explain the diVerent nance, but may gain greater functional relevance when the
patterns of occipital recruitment observed between these visual cortex is challenged by visual deprivation.
populations. For example, Veraart and collaborators (1990) Taken together, the results obtained in early and late
showed, using PET-scan, that glucose utilization in the blind subjects clearly demonstrate the presence of cross-
occipital cortex of early blind is elevated and comparable to modal plasticity, as cortical territories normally involved in
the one of sighted subjects with eyes open. However, meta- visual processing are recruited for auditory functions. How-
bolic activity in late blind was signiWcantly lower and com- ever, questions remain about the nature of the organization
parable to sighted subjects with eyes closed. This was of the visual cortex in blind people. Does the recruited
thought to reXect the persistence, in early blindness, of nor- occipital cortex process diVerent stimuli in a global manner
mally transient connections between auditory and visual or does it do so using some functional modularity similar to
centers. In late blindness, however, these extrinsic inputs that observed in sighted subjects, with precise regions
would not escape the normal developmental synaptic prun- involved in speciWc cognitive functions? As pointed in the
ing due to the presence of stabilizing visual input. In line last section, such cortical reorganization does not occur ran-
with such an assumption, an elegant study combining PET- domly and formidable constraints are imposed on the way
scan and TMS was carried out to probe the connection non-visual inputs are processed. An important characteris-
between primary somatosensory cortex (S1) and early tic of visual cortex in sighted people is domain specializa-
visual cortex (V1) in early blind, late blind and sighted sub- tion wherein speciWc functional activity has been found in
jects (Wittenberg etal. 2004). They showed that the appli- anatomically identiWable regions (Grill-Spector and Malach
cation of TMS over S1 induced signiWcant activation of V1 2004). If a speciWc domain dedicated to visual features,
only in the early blind group. These results are again con- such as color or retinal disparity, is unlikely to function as
sistent with the hypothesis of reinforced cortico-cortical such in blindness, it appears more probable that the func-
connection in early- but not in late blind subjects, possibly tional specialization described for “object”-selective
due to a lack of synaptic pruning in early blindness. regions in the ventral occipito-temporal region—and for
However, even though it was assumed that cross-modal “position in space”-selective regions in the dorsal occipito-
reorganization was absent in the late blind subjects due to parietal region—may persist in blind people. As described
the fact that it occurred after a “critical period” for plastic above, certain results seem to indicate that the occipital cor-
changes (Cohen etal. 1999), a number of studies do point tex of blind people could be organized in a modular way
to functional changes in how their occipital cortex pro- similar to the one in sighted people. Adapting the neuronal
cesses non-visual inputs (Buchel etal. 1998; Burton etal. “recycling” hypothesis (Dehaene and Cohen 2007) for
2002a, b; Burton and McLaren 2006; Voss etal. 2006, cross-modal plasticity in the blind, we postulate that
2008; see also Ghazanfar and Schroeder 2006 for a review). recruitments of occipital regions in the blind must Wnd their
Moreover, these Wndings are supported by anatomical stud- “neuronal niche” into a set of circuits that are suYciently
ies showing direct connections between auditory and visual close to the required function and suYciently plastic as to
cortical regions in adult sighted monkeys (Cappe and reorient a signiWcant fraction of their neural resources for
Barone 2005; Clavagnier etal. 2004; Falchier etal. 2002; this novel use. This is eloquently illustrated by the fact that
Rockland and Ojima 2003), suggesting that some exuberant moving sounds seem to preferentially recruit area MT+/V5
intermodal connections might not be pruned in early in blind subjects (Poirier etal. 2006a; Saenz etal. 2008), a
infancy, even if their functional purpose remains elusive. region dedicated to the processing of visual movement in
The absence of a systematic observation of such auditory the sighted (Tootell etal. 1995). Similarly, Ricciardi and
123
Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358 353
collaborators (2007) have found that tactile Xow perception sensory modality is used to accomplish a task, which is nor-
activates MT+/V5 region in blind subjects. In summary, mally subserved primarily by another sensory modality. In
these results suggest that cross-modal recruitment of visu- both cases, our understanding of neuroplastic changes in
ally deprived occipital regions might depend on the compu- the blind, and in particular cross-modal plasticity, may
tational contribution that a given region normally makes to guide the design of these methods which are currently
visual inputs in sighted subjects. under experimental consideration, but are based on oppos-
It is however also important to note that verbal-memory ing principles of rehabilitation.
tasks generate robust activations in the visual cortex of con- The use of the plastic capacity of the brain is intuitively
genitally blind subjects, even in the absence of any sensory exploited in numerous rehabilitation programs aiming at
stimulation (Amedi etal. 2003). Accordingly, language promoting non-visual skills (i.e., echo-location). Since it
task activate the same occipital regions in the blind, regard- was recently discovered that enrichment of the environment
less of the input modality (Amedi etal. 2003; Burton etal., is an eVective means of dramatically enhancing cross-
2002a). These results conWrm the presence of adaptation in modal plasticity associated with blindness (Piche etal.
the visual cortex and suggest that some recruitment of 2004), and because such reorganization mechanisms may
occipital region in blind subjects can be more likely underlie enhanced perceptual skills in the blind (Gougoux
explained in terms of particular cognitive operations rather etal. 2005), orientation and mobility programs assume that
than due to basic sensory processing. To associate these they can trigger supra-normal skills in blind subjects
results to the present topic of the paper, we also consider though rehabilitation. Hence, an increasing number of labo-
that the take-over of dorsal occipital areas of the blinds for ratories are currently engaged in developing and testing
spatial processing is done regardless of the input modality. new sensory substitution prostheses to attenuate the eVects
In fact, we know that the spatial processing of tactile stim- of visual deprivation (Amedi etal. 2007; Bach-y-Rita etal.
uli (Ricciardi etal. 2007) or even spatial imagery without 1969; Capelle etal. 1998; Collignon etal. 2007; Meijer
sensory stimulation recruits the same dorsal occipital areas 1992; Proulx etal. 2008; Poirier etal. 2007; Ptito etal.
in the blind (Vanlierde etal. 2003). Moreover, studies 2005; Renier etal. 2005). All these systems are designed to
exploring language-related activation in the occipital cortex make use of the residual intact senses to provide blind peo-
of the blind found a strong left lateralization in blind sub- ple with coded information related to lost perception in a
jects (Amedi etal. 2003; Burton etal. 2002b), in agreement rehabilitation paradigm (Veraart etal. 2004). Our group has
with the left lateralization of language processing in sighted experimented one such system, namely a prosthesis for sub-
subjects. Again, this result suggests that the recruitment of stitution of vision by audition (PSVA) (Capelle etal. 1998).
occipital regions in blind subjects may be constrained by This system has proven its eYciency in blind individuals
the normal functional organization of the brain observed in for the recognition of quite complex 2-dimensional shapes
sighted subjects. It is thus likely that visual cortex of the (Arno etal. 1999). Moreover, the latter were found to be
blinds may participate in linguistic (Amedi etal. 2003; Bur- more accurate when using the PSVA (Arno etal. 2001b)
ton etal. 2002a, b; Roder etal. 2002), memory (Amedi and they recruited more the occipital cortex than the sighted
2003) or attentional (Stevens etal. 2007; Weaver etal. when using the device in a pattern recognition task (Arno
2007) tasks as well as in more basic sensory processing. etal. 2001a; Collignon etal. 2007). As stated previously,
Whether these various functions are subserved by the same we postulate that occipital regions are recruited in a com-
or segregated sets of neurons, as well as the neural pensatory cross-modal manner that may account for the
mechanisms that mediate such plasticity (top-down pro- superior abilities seen when using the prosthesis. The sen-
cessing from associative cortices or feed-forward connec- sory substitution devices, therefore, constitute interesting
tions between primary sensory cortices), are still however new techniques that are non-invasive, and their working
elusive and must be subjects for future research (Sathian principles follow the natural tendency of the brain to reor-
2005). ganize itself through the other modalities. However, their
principal drawbacks are that they are mainly dedicated to
the fundamental study of cross-modal reorganization and
Rehabilitation do not yet constitute, in their present form, realistic oppor-
tunities for their introduction in the blind community. This
When multifunctional visual rehabilitation is desired as a is generally related to the poor ergonomic quality of such
treatment for blindness, invasive and non-invasive solu- human–machine interface. The coding scheme is quite
tions can be investigated. Invasive neuroprostheses rely on complex, inducing an excessive cognitive load when using
the integrity of visual cortex function for the generation of the device outside of laboratory settings, and the visual
visual phosphenes through electrical stimulation. In con- information gathered by the camera is generally too com-
trast, in sensory substitution, information acquired with one plex to be entirely recorded in the substitutive modality
123
354 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
without creating a “noisy” percept. Moreover, these devices tions based on the extent to which the deprived cortex is
require the use of a remaining modality (most often audi- now reorganized.
tion) that blind people already dedicate in a skilful way for
their daily-life activities. As a good example that some-
times “less is more”, and aside from the guide-dog, the only Conclusion
substitutive systems widely in use in the blind community
is the Braille reading system and the white cane, both rely- Sensory deprivation often leads to reorganization of cer-
ing on a direct and “simple” coding scheme of information. tain neural networks in order to develop the most eVec-
Consequently, it appears evident that more consideration tive possible adaptation in the remaining senses to cope
needs to be dedicated in the designing of more ergonomet- with the deWcit. In this review, we explored recent views
ric sensory substitution systems for visual rehabilitation on cross-modal plastic changes occurring in the occipital
purposes. areas of blind subjects, with a special emphasis on the
Visual prosthetic implants (see Merabet etal. 2005 or spatial processing of sounds. We have seen that the
Veraart etal. 2004 for reviews), contrary to sensory sub- absence of visual inputs in the blind may lead to
stitution systems do not take advantage of the natural improved perceptual skills and dramatic changes in the
reorganization of the cortex of the blind since such inva- functional properties of the occipital cortex. Moreover,
sive approaches attempt to stimulate the deWcient sensory it seems that these behavioral and cerebral adaptations
system directly. As such, these prostheses are mainly ded- are intrinsically linked. We also pointed out that the
icated to blindness acquired at a later age since the devel- mechanisms underlying occipital recruitment could con-
opment of the visual system and previous visual siderably diVer in early and late blind. We postulated
experience would be a prerequisite to trigger and interpret that early deprivation could favor the maintenance of
the visual percept induced by the stimulation of neural tis- normally pruned intermodal connections between corti-
sues. For example, a study demonstrated that the ability to ces while late blindness may induce the strengthening of
elicit phosphenes with application of TMS over the occip- existing intermodal connections already present in
ital area is dramatically reduced in subjects with a high sighted subjects. Moreover, we hypothesize that the
degree of visual deaVerentation, especially in those with- recruitment of occipital regions by non-visual process-
out history of visual experience (Gothe etal. 2002). Simi- ing in blind subjects may be constrained by the normal
larly, studies exploring visual skills in individuals who functional specialization of this region. For example, the
have recovered their sight after prolonged blindness (Fine spatial processing of sounds seems to recruit more
etal. 2003; Gregory 1963) have shown that they presented extensively the dorsal occipital stream in blind subjects,
marked visual deWciencies, especially when interpreting a region known to be involved in the processing of
complex visual inputs or scenes, even if more basic visual visuo-spatial information in the sighted (Haxby etal.
functions appeared to be intact (i.e., motion detection). 1991). We have now reached a point where it is no
Indeed, the loss of visual abilities following early visual longer suYcient to simply show that the occipital cortex
deprivation and consequent recruitment of occipital can be recruited by non-visual processing in the blind.
regions by non-visual inputs might in fact hinder the re- Rather, the challenge we now face is to unravel how this
acquisition of the original visual function via the pros- process could be related to normal development in
thetic implant. For example, it was recently demonstrated sighted subjects and to what extent occipital coloniza-
that individuals who had recovered their sight still had tion by a novel modality in the blind follow organiza-
robust responses to auditory stimulation in their visual tional principles present in sighted subjects. Moreover,
cortex many years after sight-recovery (Saenz etal. future studies will have to investigate how diVerences in
2008). It thus seems that the cross-modal rewiring that cross-modal plasticity in congenitally and late blind peo-
follows visual deprivation can be detrimental to the ple may be related to activation of the occipital cortex
preservation of visual processing capabilities in the by non-visual input already present in sighted people.
regions. A similar phenomenon can be observed in deaf The aim should be to provide a uniWed framework to
individuals. It was demonstrated that because of cross- understand cross-modal processing in the occipital cor-
modal plasticity, resulting in visual activation of the audi- tex of normal and visually deprived people, and reveal
tory cortex, impaired the chances of a successful outcome the mechanisms that may facilitate network dynamics in
to cochlear implantation (Doucet etal. 2006; Lee etal. order to improve the functional outcome.
2001). These results suggest that pre-implantation neuro-
imaging assessments could guide implementation of neu- Acknowledgments This work was supported by the FRSQ Rehabil-
itation network (REPAR; ML, FL, OC), the FRSQ Group grant (ML,
roprostheses, such as cochlear or visual implants, by
FL), the Canada Research Chair Program (ML, FL), the Canadian
allowing the prediction of the outcome of such interven-
123
Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358 355
Institutes of Health Research (ML, FL) and the Natural Sciences and Burton H, McLaren DG (2006) Visual cortex activation in late-onset,
Engineering Research Council of Canada (ML, FL, PV). OC is a post- Braille naive blind individuals: an fMRI study during semantic and
doctoral researcher at the Belgian National Funds for ScientiWc Re- phonological tasks with heard words. Neurosci Lett 392:38–42
search (F.R.S.-FNRS). Burton H, Snyder AZ, Conturo TE, Akbudak E, Ollinger JM, Raichle
ME (2002a) Adaptive changes in early and late blind: a fMRI
study of Braille reading. J Neurophysiol 87:589–607
Burton H, Snyder AZ, Diamond JB, Raichle ME (2002b) Adaptive
References
changes in early and late blind: a FMRI study of verb generation
to heard nouns. J Neurophysiol 88:3359–3371
Allman BL, Meredith MA (2007) Multisensory processing in “unimo- Cappe C, Barone P (2005) Heteromodal connections supporting mul-
dal” neurons: cross-modal subthreshold auditory eVects in cat tisensory integration at low levels of cortical processing in the
extrastriate visual cortex. J Neurophysiol 98:545–549 monkey. Eur J NeuroSci 22:2886–2902
Amedi A, Raz N, Pianka P, Malach R, Zohary E (2003) Early ‘visual’ Capelle C, Trullemans C, Arno P, Veraart C (1998) A real-time exper-
cortex activation correlates with superior verbal memory perfor- imental prototype for enhancement of vision rehabilitation using
mance in the blind. Nat Neurosci 6:758–766 auditory substitution. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 45:1279–1293
Amedi A, Floel A, Knecht S, Zohary E, Cohen LG (2004) Transcranial Chabot N, Charbonneau V, Laramee ME, Tremblay R, Boire D, Bron-
magnetic stimulation of the occipital pole interferes with verbal chti G (2008) Subcortical auditory input to the primary visual cor-
processing in blind subjects. Nat Neurosci 7(11):1266–1270 tex in anophthalmic mice. Neurosci Lett 433:129–134
Amedi A, Stern WM, Camprodon JA, Bermpohl F, Merabet L, Rotman Changeux JP, Danchin A (1976) Selective stabilisation of developing
S, Hemond C, Meijer P, Pascual-Leone A (2007) Shape conveyed synapses as a mechanism for the speciWcation of neuronal net-
by visual-to-auditory sensory substitution activates the lateral works. Nature 264:705–712
occipital complex. Nat Neurosci 10:687–689 Changeux JP, Courrege P, Danchin A (1973) A theory of the epigene-
Arno P, Capelle C, Wanet-Defalque MC, Catalan-Ahumada M, Vera- sis of neuronal networks by selective stabilization of synapses.
art C (1999) Auditory coding of visual patterns for the blind. Per- Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 70:2974–2978
ception 28:1013–1029 Clavagnier S, Falchier A, Kennedy H (2004) Long-distance feedback
Arno P, De Volder AG, Vanlierde A, Wanet-Defalque MC, Streel E, projections to area V1: implications for multisensory integration,
Robert A, Sanabria-Bohorquez S, Veraart C (2001a) Occipital spatial awareness, and visual consciousness. Cogn AVect Behav
activation by pattern recognition in the early blind using auditory Neurosci 4:117–126
substitution for vision. Neuroimage 13:632–645 Cohen LG, Celnik P, Pascual-Leone A, Corwell B, Falz L, Dambrosia
Arno P, Vanlierde A, Streel E, Wanet-Defalque MC, Sanabria-Bohor- J, Honda M, Sadato N, GerloV C, Catala MD, Hallett M (1997)
quez SM, Veraart C (2001b) Auditory substitution of vision : pat- Functional relevance of cross-modal plasticity in blind humans.
tern recognition by blind. Appl Cogn Psychol 15:509–519 Nature 389:180–183
Ashmead DH, Hill EW, Talor CR (1989) Obstacle perception by con- Cohen LG, Weeks RA, Sadato N, Celnik P, Ishii K, Hallett M (1999)
genitally blind children. Percept Psychophys 46:425–433 Period of susceptibility for cross-modal plasticity in the blind.
Ashmead DH, Wall RS, Ebinger KA, Eaton SB, Snook-Hill MM, Ann Neurol 45:451–460
Yang X (1998) Spatial hearing in children with visual disabilities. Collignon O, Renier L, Bruyer R, Tranduy D, Veraart C (2006) Im-
Perception 27:105–122 proved selective and divided spatial attention in early blind sub-
Axelrod S (1959) EVect of early blindness: performance of blind and jects. Brain Res 1075(1):175–182
sighted children on tactile and auditory tasks. American Founda- Collignon O, Lassonde M, Lepore F, Bastien D, Veraart C (2007)
tion for the Blind, New York Functional cerebral reorganization for auditory spatial processing
Bavelier D, Tomann A, Hutton C, Mitchell T, Corina D, Liu G, Neville and auditory substitution of vision in early blind subjects. Cereb
H (2000) Visual attention to the periphery is enhanced in congen- Cortex 17:457–465
itally deaf individuals. J Neurosci 20:RC93 Collignon O, Davare M, De Volder AG, Poirier C, Olivier E, Veraart C
Bach-y-Rita P, Collins CC, Saunders FA, White B, Scadden L (1969) (2008) Time-course of posterior parietal and occipital cortex contri-
Vision substitution by tactile image projection. Nature 221:963– bution to sound localization. J Cogn Neurosci 20(8):1454–1463
964 De Volder AG, Bol A, Blin J, Robert A, Arno P, Grandin C, Michel C,
Berman NE (1991) Alterations of visual cortical connections in cats Veraart C (1997) Brain energy metabolism in early blind subjects:
following early removal of retinal input. Brain Res Dev Brain Res neural activity in the visual cortex. Brain Res 750:235–244
63:163–180 De Volder AG, Toyama H, Kimura Y, Kiyosawa M, Nakano H, Van-
Boroojerdi B, Bushara KO, Corwell B, Immisch I, Battaglia F, Muellb- lierde A, Wanet-Defalque MC, Mishina M, Oda K, Ishiwata K,
acher W, Cohen LG (2000) Enhanced excitability of the human Senda M (2001) Auditory triggered mental imagery of shape in-
visual cortex induced by short-term light deprivation. Cereb Cor- volves visual association areas in early blind humans. Neuroim-
tex 10:529–534 age 14:129–139
Bourgeois JP, Rakic P (1993) Changes of synaptic density in the pri- Dehaene S, Cohen L (2007) Cultural recycling of cortical maps. Neu-
mary visual cortex of the macaque monkey from fetal to adult ron 56:384–398
stage. J Neurosci 13:2801–2820 Dehay C, Kennedy H, Bullier J (1988) Characterization of transient
Bourgeois JP, Rakic P (1996) Synaptogenesis in the occipital cortex of cortical projections from auditory, somatosensory, and motor cor-
macaque monkey devoid of retinal input from early embryonic tices to visual areas 17, 18, and 19 in the kitten. J Comp Neurol
stages. Eur J NeuroSci 8:942–950 272:68–89
Buchel C (1998) Functional neuroimaging studies of Braille reading: Despres O, Candas V, Dufour A (2005) Auditory compensation in
cross-modal reorganization and its implications. Brain 121(Pt myopic humans: involvement of binaural, monaural, or echo
7):1193–1194 cues? Brain Res 1041:56–65
Buchel C, Price C, Frackowiak RS, Friston K (1998) DiVerent activa- Doron N, Wollberg Z (1994) Cross-modal neuroplasticity in the blind
tion patterns in the visual cortex of late and congenitally blind mole rat Spalax ehrenbergi: a WGA-HRP tracing study. Neurore-
subjects. Brain 121(Pt 3):409–419 port 5:2697–2701
123
356 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
Doucet ME, Guillemot JP, Lassonde M, Gagne JP, Leclerc C, Lepore Innocenti GM, Berbel P, Clarke S (1988) Development of projections
F (2004) Blind subjects process auditory spectral cues more eY- from auditory to visual areas in the cat. J Comp Neurol 272:242–
ciently than sighted individuals. Exp Brain Res 160(2):194–202 259
Doucet ME, Bergeron F, Lassonde M, Ferron P, Lepore F (2006) Izraeli R, Koay G, Lamish M, Heicklen-Klein AJ, HeVner HE, HeVner
Cross-modal reorganization and speech perception in cochlear RS, Wollberg Z (2002) Cross-modal neuroplasticity in neonatally
implant users. Brain 129:3376–3383 enucleated hamsters: structure, electrophysiology and behaviour.
Dufour A, Gerard Y (2000) Improved auditory spatial sensitivity in Eur J NeuroSci 15:693–712
near-sighted subjects. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 10:159–165 Karlen SJ, Kahn DM, Krubitzer L (2006) Early blindness results in
Dufour A, Despres O, Candas V (2005) Enhanced sensitivity to echo abnormal corticocortical and thalamocortical connections. Neuro-
cues in blind subjects. Exp Brain Res 165:515–519 science 142:843–858
Elbert T, Sterr A, Rockstroh B, Pantev C, Muller MM, Taub E (2002) Kastner S, De WP, Ungerleider LG (2000) Texture segregation in the
Expansion of the tonotopic area in the auditory cortex of the blind. human visual cortex: a functional MRI study. J Neurophysiol
J Neurosci 22:9941–9944 83:2453–2457
Facchini S, Aglioti SM (2003) Short term light deprivation increases KauVman T, Theoret H, Pascual-Leone A (2002) Braille character dis-
tactile spatial acuity in humans. Neurology 60:1998–1999 crimination in blindfolded human subjects. Neuroreport 13:571–
Falchier A, Clavagnier S, Barone P, Kennedy H (2002) Anatomical 574
evidence of multimodal integration in primate striate cortex. J Kennedy H, Bullier J, Dehay C (1989) Transient projection from the
Neurosci 22:5749–5759 superior temporal sulcus to area 17 in the newborn macaque mon-
Fieger A, Roder B, Teder-Salejarvi W, Hillyard SA, Neville HJ (2006) key. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:8093–8097
Auditory spatial tuning in late-onset blindness in humans. J Cogn King AJ, Parsons CH (1999) Improved auditory spatial acuity in visu-
Neurosci 18:149–157 ally deprived ferrets. Eur J Neurosci 11:3945–3956
Fine I, Wade AR, Brewer AA, May MG, Goodman DF, Boynton GM, Knudsen EI (1988) Early blindness results in a degraded auditory map
Wandell BA, MacLeod DI (2003) Long-term deprivation aVects of space in the optic tectum of the barn owl. Proc Natl Acad Sci
visual perception and cortex. Nat Neurosci 6:915–916 USA 85(16):6211–6214
Fishman MC, Michael P (1973) Integration of auditory information in Korte M, Rauschecker JP (1993) Auditory spatial tuning of cortical
the cat’s visual cortex. Vision Res 13:1415–1419 neurons is sharpened in cats with early blindness. J Neurophysiol
Frost DO, Metin C (1985) Induction of functional retinal projections to 70:1717–1721
the somatosensory system. Nature 317:162–164 Kujala T, Alho K, Paavilainen P, Summala H, Naatanen R (1992) Neu-
Frost DO, Boire D, Gingras G, Ptito M (2000) Surgically created neu- ral plasticity in processing of sound location by the early blind: an
ral pathways mediate visual pattern discrimination. Proc Natl event-related potential study. Electroencephalogr Clin Neuro-
Acad Sci USA 97:11068–11073 physiol 84:469–472
Ghazanfar AA, Schroeder CE (2006) Is neocortex essentially multi- Kujala T, Huotilainen M, Sinkkonen J, Ahonen AI, Alho K, Hamalai-
sensory? Trends Cogn Sci 10:278–285 nen MS, Ilmoniemi RJ, Kajola M, Knuutila JE, Lavikainen J
Giard MH, Peronnet F (1999) Auditory-visual integration during mul- (1995) Visual cortex activation in blind humans during sound dis-
timodal object recognition in humans: a behavioral and electro- crimination. Neurosci Lett 183:143–146
physiological study. J Cogn Neurosci 11:473–490 Kujala T, Alho K, Huotilainen M, Ilmoniemi RJ, Lehtokoski A, Lei-
Gothe J, Brandt SA, Irlbacher K, Roricht S, Sabel BA, Meyer BU nonen A, Rinne T, Salonen O, Sinkkonen J, Standertskjold-Nor-
(2002) Changes in visual cortex excitability in blind subjects as denstam CG, Naatanen R (1997) Electrophysiological evidence
demonstrated by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Brain for cross-modal plasticity in humans with early- and late-onset
125:479–490 blindness. Psychophysiology 34:213–216
Gougoux F, Zatorre RJ, Lassonde M, Voss P, Lepore F (2005) A func- Kupers R, Pappens M, de Noordhout AM, Schoenen J, Ptito M, Fumal
tional neuroimaging study of sound localization: visual cortex A (2007) rTMS of the occipital cortex abolishes Braille reading
activity predicts performance in early-blind individuals. PLoS and repetition priming in blind subjects. Neurology 68:691–693
Biol 3:e27 Leclerc C, Saint-Amour D, Lavoie ME, Lassonde M, Lepore F (2000)
Gregory RL, Wallace JG (1963) Experimental psychological society Brain functional reorganization in early blind humans revealed by
monograph. HeVer and Sons, Cambridge auditory event-related potentials. Neuroreport 11:545–550
Grill-Spector K, Malach R (2004) The human visual cortex. Annu Rev Leclerc C, Segalowitz SJ, Desjardins J, Lassonde M, Lepore F (2005)
Neurosci 27:649–677 EEG coherence in early-blind humans during sound localization.
Haxby JV, Grady CL, Horwitz B, Ungerleider LG, Mishkin M, Carson Neurosci Lett 376:154–159
RE, Herscovitch P, Schapiro MB, Rapoport SI (1991) Dissocia- Lee DS, Lee JS, Oh SH, Kim SK, Kim JW, Chung JK, Lee MC, Kim
tion of object and spatial visual processing pathways in human ex- CS (2001) Cross-modal plasticity and cochlear implants. Nature
trastriate cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:1621–1625 409:149–150
Haxby JV, Horwitz B, Ungerleider LG, Maisog JM, Pietrini P, Grady Lessard N, Pare M, Lepore F, Lassonde M (1998) Early-blind human
CL (1994) The functional organization of human extrastriate cor- subjects localize sound sources better than sighted subjects.
tex: a PET-rCBF study of selective attention to faces and loca- Nature 395:278–280
tions. J Neurosci 14:6336–6353 Lewald J (2002a) Vertical sound localization in blind humans. Neuro-
Hebb DO (1949) The organization of behavior. John Wiley, New York psychologia 40:1868–1872
Huttenlocher PR (1966) Development of neuronal activity in neocor- Lewald J (2002b) Opposing eVects of head position on sound localiza-
tex of the kitten. Nature 211:91–92 tion in blind and sighted human subjects. Eur J Neurosci 15:1219–
Huttenlocher PR, Court de (1987) The development of synapses in stri- 1224
ate cortex of man. Hum Neurobiol 6:1–9 Lewald J (2007) More accurate sound localization induced by short-
Huttenlocher PR, Dabholkar AS (1997) Regional diVerences in syna- term light deprivation. Neuropsychologia 45:1215–1222
ptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. J Comp Neurol 387:167– Lewald J, Meister IG, Weidemann J, Topper R (2004) Involvement of
178 the superior temporal cortex and the occipital cortex in spatial
Innocenti GM, Clarke S (1984) Bilateral transitory projection to visual hearing: evidence from repetitive transcranial magnetic stimula-
areas from auditory cortex in kittens. Brain Res 316:143–148 tion. J Cogn Neurosci 16:828–838
123
Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358 357
Locke JC (1954) Retrolental Wbroplasia deWnitive role of oxygen Rauschecker JP (1995) Compensatory plasticity and sensory substitu-
administration in its etiology. AMA Arch Ophthalmol 51:73–79 tion in the cerebral cortex. Trends Neurosci 18:36–43
Meijer PB (1992) An experimental system for auditory image repre- Rauschecker JP, Kniepert U (1994) Auditory localization behaviour in
sentations. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 39:112–121 visually deprived cats. Eur J Neurosci 6:149–160
Mendola JD, Dale AM, Fischl B, Liu AK, Tootell RB (1999) The rep- Rauschecker JP, Korte M (1993) Auditory compensation for early
resentation of illusory and real contours in human cortical visual blindness in cat cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 13:4538–4548
areas revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. J Neu- Renier L, Collignon O, Poirier C, Tranduy D, Vanlierde A, Bol A,
rosci 19:8560–8572 Veraart C, De Volder AG (2005) Cross-modal activation of visual
Merabet LB, Rizzo JF, Amedi A, Somers DC, Pascual-Leone A (2005) cortex during depth perception using auditory substitution of
What blindness can tell us about seeing again: merging neuroplas- vision. Neuroimage 26:573–580
ticity and neuroprostheses. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:71–77 Ricciardi E, Vanello N, Sani L, Gentili C, Scilingo EP, Landini L,
Molholm S, Ritter W, Murray MM, Javitt DC, Schroeder CE, Foxe JJ Guazzelli M, Bicchi A, Haxby JV, Pietrini P (2007) The eVect of
(2002) Multisensory auditory-visual interactions during early visual experience on the development of functional architecture in
sensory processing in humans: a high-density electrical mapping hMT+. Cereb Cortex 17:2933–2939
study. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 14:115–128 Rice CE, Feinstein SH (1965) Sonar system of the blind: size discrim-
Morrell F (1972) Visual system’s view of acoustic space. Nature ination. Science 148:1107–1108
238:44–46 Rice CE, Feinstein SH, Schusterman RJ (1965) Echo-detection ability
Munte TF, Kohlmetz C, Nager W, Altenmuller E (2001) Neuropercep- of the blind: size and distance factors. J Exp Psychol 70:246–255
tion. Superior auditory spatial tuning in conductors. Nature Rock I, Halper F (1969) Form perception without a retinal image. Am
409:580 J Psychol 82:425–440
Neville HJ, Lawson D (1987) Attention to central and peripheral visual Rockland KS, Ojima H (2003) Multisensory convergence in calcarine
space in a movement detection task: an event-related potential visual areas in macaque monkey. Int J Psychophysiol 50:19–26
and behavioral study. II. Congenitally deaf adults. Brain Res Roder B, Rosler F (2003) Memory for environmental sounds in sight-
405:268–283 ed, congenitally blind and late blind adults: evidence for cross-
Pascual-Leone A, Hamilton R (2001) The metamodal organization of modal compensation. Int J Psychophysiol 50:27–39
the brain. Prog Brain Res 134:427–445 Roder B, Teder-Salejarvi W, Sterr A, Rosler F, Hillyard SA, Neville
Pascual-Leone A, Torres F (1993) Plasticity of the sensorimotor cortex HJ (1999) Improved auditory spatial tuning in blind humans.
representation of the reading Wnger in Braille readers. Brain Nature 400:162–166
116(Pt 1):39–52 Roder B, Rosler F, Neville HJ (2000) Event-related potentials during
Pascual-Leone A, Amedi A, Fregni F, Merabet LB (2005) The plastic auditory language processing in congenitally blind and sighted
human brain cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 28:377–401 people. Neuropsychologia 38:1482–1502
Piche M, Robert S, Miceli D, Bronchti G (2004) Environmental enrich- Roder B, Rosler F, Neville HJ (2001) Auditory memory in congeni-
ment enhances auditory takeover of the occipital cortex in anoph- tally blind adults: a behavioral-electrophysiological investigation.
thalmic mice. Eur J Neurosci 20:3463–3472 Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 11:289–303
Piche M, Chabot N, Bronchti G, Miceli D, Lepore F, Guillemot JP Röder B, Stock O, Bien S, Neville H, Rösler F (2002) Speech process-
(2007) Auditory responses in the visual cortex of neonatally enu- ing activates visual cortex in congenitally blind humans. Eur J
cleated rats. Neuroscience 145:1144–1156 Neurosci 16(5):930–936
Pietrini P, Furey ML, Ricciardi E, Gobbini MI, Wu WH, Cohen L, Roe AW, Pallas SL, Hahm JO, Sur M (1990) A map of visual space
Guazzelli M, Haxby JV (2004) Beyond sensory images: object- induced in primary auditory cortex. Science 250:818–820
based representation in the human ventral pathway. Proc Natl Roe AW, Pallas SL, Kwon YH, Sur M (1992) Visual projections rout-
Acad Sci USA 101:5658–5663 ed to the auditory pathway in ferrets: receptive Welds of visual
Pitskel NB, Merabet LB, Ramos-Estebanez C, KauVman T, Pascual- neurons in primary auditory cortex. J Neurosci 12:3651–3664
Leone A (2007) Time-dependent changes in cortical excitability Sadato N, Pascual-Leone A, Grafman J, Ibanez V, Deiber MP, Dold G,
after prolonged visual deprivation. Neuroreport 18:1703–1707 Hallett M (1996) Activation of the primary visual cortex by
Poirier C, Collignon O, Devolder AG, Renier L, Vanlierde A, Tranduy Braille reading in blind subjects. Nature 380:526–528
D, Scheiber C (2005) SpeciWc activation of the V5 brain area by Sadato N, Okada T, Honda M, Yonekura Y (2002) Critical period for
auditory motion processing: an fMRI study. Brain Res Cogn cross-modal plasticity in blind humans: a functional MRI study.
Brain Res 25:650–658 Neuroimage 16:389–400
Poirier C, Collignon O, Scheiber C, Renier L, Vanlierde A, Tranduy D, Saenz M, Lewis LB, Huth AG, Fine I, Koch C (2008) Visual motion
Veraart C, De Volder AG (2006) Auditory motion perception area mt+/v5 responds to auditory motion in human sight-recovery
activates visual motion areas in early blind subjects. Neuroimage subjects. J Neurosci 28:5141–5148
31:279–285 Sathian K (2005) Visual cortical activity during tactile perception in
Poirier C, De Volder AG, Scheiber C (2007) What neuroimaging tells the sighted and the visually deprived. Dev Psychobiol 46(3):279–
us about sensory substitution. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 31:1064– 286
1070 Simon HJ, Divenyi PL, Lotze A (2002) Lateralization of narrow-band
Proulx MJ, Stoerig P, Ludowig E, Knoll I (2008) Seeing ‘where’ noise by blind and sighted listeners. Perception 31:855–873
through the ears: eVects of learning-by-doing and long-term sen- Stein BE, Meredith MA (1993) The merging of the senses. MIT, Cam-
sory deprivation on localization based on image-to-sound substi- bridge
tution. PLoS ONE 3:e1840 Sterr A, Muller MM, Elbert T, Rockstroh B, Pantev C, Taub E (1998)
Ptito M, Moesgaard SM, Gjedde A, Kupers R (2005) Cross-modal Perceptual correlates of changes in cortical representation of Wn-
plasticity revealed by electrotactile stimulation of the tongue in gers in blind multiWnger Braille readers. J Neurosci 18:4417–
the congenitally blind. Brain 128(Pt 3):606–614 4423
Rakic P, Bourgeois JP, EckenhoV MF, Zecevic N, Goldman-Rakic PS Stevens AA, Snodgrass M, Schwartz D, Weaver K (2007) Preparatory
(1986) Concurrent overproduction of synapses in diverse regions activity in occipital cortex in early blind humans predicts auditory
of the primate cerebral cortex. Science 232:232–235 perceptual performance. J Neurosci 27(40):10734–10741
123
358 Exp Brain Res (2009) 192:343–358
Strelow ER, Brabyn JA (1982) Locomotion of the blind controlled by during a sound-source discrimination task. Neuroimage 40:746–
natural sound cues. Perception 11:635–640 758
Sur M, Garraghty PE, Roe AW (1988) Experimentally induced visual pro- Wanet-Defalque MC, Veraart C, De Volder A, Metz R, Michel C,
jections into auditory thalamus and cortex. Science 242:1437–1441 Dooms G, GoYnet A (1988) High metabolic activity in the visual
Tootell RB, Reppas JB, Kwong KK, Malach R, Born RT, Brady TJ, cortex of early blind human subjects. Brain Res 446:369–373
Rosen BR, Belliveau JW (1995) Functional analysis of human Warren DH, Cleaves WT (1971) Visual-proprioceptive interaction
MT and related visual cortical areas using magnetic resonance under large amounts of conXict. J Exp Psychol 90:206–214
imaging. J Neurosci 15:3215–3230 Weaver KE, Stevens AA (2007) Attention and sensory interactions
Van Wanrooij MM, Van Opstal AJ (2004) Contribution of head shad- within the occipital cortex in the early blind: an fMRI study.
ow and pinna cues to chronic monaural sound localization. J Neu- JCogn Neurosci 19(2):315–330
rosci 24:4163–4171 Weeks R, Horwitz B, Aziz-Sultan A, Tian B, Wessinger CM, Cohen
Vanlierde A, De Volder AG, Wanet-Defalque MC, Veraart C (2003) LG, Hallett M, Rauschecker JP (2000) A positron emission tomo-
Occipito-parietal cortex activation during visuo-spatial imagery graphic study of auditory localization in the congenitally blind.
in early blind humans. Neuroimage 19:698–709 JNeurosci 20:2664–2672
Veraart C, De Volder AG, Wanet-Defalque MC, Bol A, Michel C, Wiesel TN, Hubel DH (1965) Extent of recovery from the eVects of
GoYnet AM (1990) Glucose utilization in human visual cortex is visual deprivation in kittens. J Neurophysiol 28:1060–1072
abnormally elevated in blindness of early onset but decreased in Wiesel TN, Hubel DH (1974) Ordered arrangement of orientation col-
blindness of late onset. Brain Res 510:115–121 umns in monkeys lacking visual experience. J Comp Neurol
Veraart C, Duret F, Brelen M, Oozeer M, Delbeke J (2004) Vision 158:307–318
rehabilitation in the case of blindness. Expert Rev Med Devices Wittenberg GF, Werhahn KJ, Wassermann EM, Herscovitch P, Cohen
1:139–153 LG (2004) Functional connectivity between somatosensory and
von Melchner L, Pallas SL, Sur M (2000) Visual behaviour mediated visual cortex in early blind humans. Eur J Neurosci 20:1923–1927
by retinal projections directed to the auditory pathway. Nature Yabe T, Kaga K (2005) Sound lateralization test in adolescent blind
404:871–876 individuals. Neuroreport 16:939–942
Voss P, Lassonde M, Gougoux F, Fortin M, Guillemot JP, Lepore F Yaka R, Yinon U, Wollberg Z (1999) Auditory activation of cortical
(2004) Early- and late-onset blind individuals show supra-normal visual areas in cats after early visual deprivation. Eur J Neurosci
auditory abilities in far-space. Curr Biol 14:1734–1738 11:1301–1312
Voss P, Gougoux F, Lassonde M, Zatorre RJ, Lepore F (2006) A pos- Zimmer U, Lewald J, Erb M, Grodd W, Karnath HO (2004) Is there a
itron emission tomography study during auditory localization by role of visual cortex in spatial hearing? Eur J Neurosci 20:3148–
late-onset blind individuals. Neuroreport 17:383–388 3156
Voss P, Gougoux F, Zatorre RJ, Lassonde M, Lepore F (2008) Zwiers MP, Van Opstal AJ, Cruysberg JR (2001) A spatial hearing
DiVerential occipital responses in early- and late-blind individuals deWcit in early-blind humans. J Neurosci 21:RC142–RC145
123
